Thank you.
[SPEAKER_01]: Hello and welcome to Veterans of the Valley.
[SPEAKER_01]: I'm Tom Turveyville.
[SPEAKER_01]: Join the Navy and see the world.
[SPEAKER_01]: And indeed, Lieutenant Commander Garland Bayless of College Station saw most of it in his two-year service aboard Auxiliary Personnel 149, a troop transport ship during World War II.
[SPEAKER_01]: It was a vessel built only as a transport and ferried up to 3,000 from one town or island to another.
[SPEAKER_01]: It took some back from war.
[SPEAKER_01]: from home and some from home into that.
[SPEAKER_01]: You know, I messed that up when I was rehearsing it.
[SPEAKER_01]: I wrote it right, I just can't say it.
[SPEAKER_01]: Sorry about that.
[SPEAKER_01]: That happens about three times a year.
[SPEAKER_01]: So congratulations, you were here.
[SPEAKER_00]: I messed you up.
[SPEAKER_01]: No, you didn't.
[SPEAKER_01]: No, no, I messed my up.
[SPEAKER_01]: Let me look at it and see.
[SPEAKER_01]: I know I wrote it right.
[SPEAKER_01]: I just, it's just awkward for me to see.
[SPEAKER_01]: I wrote it the way I meant to read it.
[SPEAKER_01]: It's just that my eyes aren't.
[SPEAKER_01]: It was a vessel built only as a transport and ferried up to 3,000 from one town or island to another.
[SPEAKER_01]: It took some back home from war and some from home into war.
[SPEAKER_01]: That's exactly what I want.
[SPEAKER_01]: It took some.
[SPEAKER_01]: Okay, I'm going to read every word.
[SPEAKER_00]: You just got it tangled a little bit there.
[SPEAKER_01]: Okay, sorry about that.
[SPEAKER_01]: They need stuff for their Christmas party tape.
[SPEAKER_01]: That's why I did that.
Thank you.
[SPEAKER_01]: Hello and welcome to Veterans of the Valley.
[SPEAKER_01]: I'm Tom Turveyville.
[SPEAKER_01]: Join the Navy and see the world.
[SPEAKER_01]: And indeed, Lieutenant Commander Garland Bayless of College Station saw most of it in his two-year service aboard auxiliary personnel 149, a troop transport ship during World War II.
[SPEAKER_01]: It was a vessel built only as a transport and ferried up to 3,000 from one town or island to another.
[SPEAKER_01]: It took some back home from war and some from home into war.
[SPEAKER_01]: it was on the water both in the pacific and atlantic for two years and he traveled some 125 000 nautical miles in all garland bayless spent 30 years in the navy and the reserves and then later spent 34 years as a professor of history at texas a m please welcome garland bayless to veterans of the valley garland it's an honor to to know you i've known you for some time and to have you here on veterans of the valley
[SPEAKER_01]: Finally, let's talk a little bit about growing up.
[SPEAKER_01]: You grew up in McGee, Arkansas.
[SPEAKER_00]: That is correct.
[SPEAKER_01]: Southeast part of the state.
[SPEAKER_01]: Talk about growing up in McGee.
[SPEAKER_00]: Well, McGee was a small country town, about 3,000, 18 miles of Mississippi River, 40 miles north of Louisiana.
[SPEAKER_00]: The railroad town is essentially up in a railroad family, also cotton and corn.
[SPEAKER_00]: Rural of the country folks all came to town on Saturday.
[SPEAKER_00]: I won't go into what is called furnish day, you've probably never heard of it.
[SPEAKER_00]: That's when the land owners furnish their tenants with money to make the ensuing crop.
[SPEAKER_00]: Got out of high school there, started college in Monticello, Arkansas, then Arkansas A&M, now the University of Arkansas at Monticello.
[SPEAKER_00]: Very small school, virtually no men left.
[SPEAKER_00]: The 206th Coastal Artillery Battery had been activated.
[SPEAKER_00]: and sent to Alaska, that left a ratio of about four women to every boy, which was pretty good.
[SPEAKER_00]: That wasn't a bad deal.
[SPEAKER_00]: Wasn't a bad deal.
[SPEAKER_01]: I want to go back to your family.
[SPEAKER_01]: Your family was in the railroad business.
[SPEAKER_00]: Your dad was a conductor.
[SPEAKER_00]: That's right, and two brothers were conductors.
[SPEAKER_00]: And two brothers worked.
[SPEAKER_00]: And they were thus exempt from the draft.
[SPEAKER_00]: Right.
[SPEAKER_00]: My two other brothers, both drafted.
[SPEAKER_00]: One spent over four years overseas, another three and a half years before they got home.
[SPEAKER_00]: Right.
[SPEAKER_00]: They were stationed.
[SPEAKER_00]: One went from North Africa, Sicily, to Italy, into France and into Germany before the war was over.
[SPEAKER_00]: Exactly.
[SPEAKER_00]: The other was stationed off the Persian Gulf in Basra, part of the Lend-Lease Program of material from the United States to Russia and reverse.
[SPEAKER_00]: Right.
[SPEAKER_01]: You went from Arkansas to, you talked about the programs, a V1 program that eventually became a V12 program.
[SPEAKER_01]: And it had to do with education, how many semesters.
[SPEAKER_01]: And talk about sort of how that worked and eventually how that got you to Columbia University.
[SPEAKER_00]: Well, in November of 42, we all knew we were going to have to do something.
[SPEAKER_00]: 18, we debated in college dorms what to do.
[SPEAKER_00]: I said, I'm going to the Navy and said, Garland, don't, you can't swim very well.
[SPEAKER_00]: I wanted to be in a foxhole in the Army.
[SPEAKER_00]: So I went to Little Rock, Arkansas in November 1942, joined what was called the Navy V-1 program.
[SPEAKER_00]: The theory here, that word theory, was you would stay in that program until you received your degree, and then you go to Officer's Candidate School, or Navy Midshipman.
[SPEAKER_00]: The war progressed.
[SPEAKER_00]: They needed officers.
[SPEAKER_00]: They cut that down through the V1 program.
[SPEAKER_00]: Arkansas and at Monticello was selected as one of those schools.
[SPEAKER_00]: So I put on a uniform along with guys in the Marine Corps.
[SPEAKER_00]: including Tom Chandler, who was in the Marine Corps, though I didn't know Tom then, our former head baseball coach.
[SPEAKER_01]: You didn't know you were together until you got here.
[SPEAKER_00]: Until I got here, that is correct.
[SPEAKER_00]: Right.
[SPEAKER_00]: And so after a total of five semesters, got three, got two, whatever, I was sent to Columbia University in New York City to Navy midshipment school for a 90-day program to convert me, hopefully, into a naval officer.
[SPEAKER_01]: Yeah, you talked about how a country boy from McGee, Arkansas, going up to New York City, that was
[SPEAKER_01]: Quite a culture shock.
[SPEAKER_00]: Very much.
[SPEAKER_00]: I'd been to New Orleans once and Little Rock a lot of times.
[SPEAKER_00]: They were then small.
[SPEAKER_00]: So I go from there to New York, like thousands and thousands of people pulled out of the farms or rural areas in the cities to different environments.
[SPEAKER_00]: And I walked the streets in New York looking at tall buildings.
[SPEAKER_00]: First time I had liberty, I got lost, went to the wrong place.
[SPEAKER_00]: But I finally got back to Columbia University.
[SPEAKER_00]: Right.
[SPEAKER_00]: And I was commissioned there in early October 1944.
[SPEAKER_01]: Now, when you left Columbia and came back home on your way to the West Coast to be deployed, did you know at that time where you were going to be assigned that you were going to be assigned to a transport ship?
[SPEAKER_00]: Yes, I already had my orders.
[SPEAKER_00]: You already had your orders.
[SPEAKER_00]: And they gave me 10-day leave en route to California to Long Beach to pick up my ship.
[SPEAKER_00]: And that ship at that point had made only one trip, and that was to Hawaii.
[SPEAKER_00]: Right.
[SPEAKER_00]: They took 400 of various types of personnel there.
[SPEAKER_00]: We loaded in Long Beach a mixed group, OSS, which was a precursor of the CIA, Red Cross personnel,
[SPEAKER_00]: an Army mule pack outfit.
[SPEAKER_00]: We did not have the mules.
[SPEAKER_00]: We took them to Calcutta.
[SPEAKER_00]: They got their mules, and then they had a mule pack train across the Lido Road from India to China.
[SPEAKER_00]: So they were interesting.
[SPEAKER_00]: They trained in Colorado.
[SPEAKER_00]: Interesting, interesting people.
[SPEAKER_01]: That's the one thing about your service and your deployment was that
[SPEAKER_01]: You met all kinds of people and who you transported.
[SPEAKER_01]: Let's go back.
[SPEAKER_01]: You went home and you went to San Francisco.
[SPEAKER_00]: Long Beach that time.
[SPEAKER_00]: Right, Long Beach.
[SPEAKER_01]: Talk about the vessel.
[SPEAKER_01]: It was named after a General J.H.
[SPEAKER_01]: McCray, who I looked up and found out that he was a military man of the 1800s.
[SPEAKER_01]: I don't know much more about his history.
[SPEAKER_00]: I don't know either.
[SPEAKER_01]: But it was actually called the AP Auxiliary Personnel 149.
[SPEAKER_01]: Talk a little bit about the ship.
[SPEAKER_01]: It was a large ship, obviously, because you were able to
[SPEAKER_01]: to bring aboard 3,000 plus a crew of how many?
[SPEAKER_00]: About 430.
[SPEAKER_01]: About 430.
[SPEAKER_01]: Talk about the ship.
[SPEAKER_01]: Was it pretty crowded?
[SPEAKER_00]: Well, it was pretty crowded.
[SPEAKER_00]: As indicated in his earlier remarks, it was built as a transport in the Kaiser shipyards.
[SPEAKER_00]: It was not a conversion.
[SPEAKER_00]: So we were set up.
[SPEAKER_00]: We complement our troops three meals a day.
[SPEAKER_00]: Many just got two.
[SPEAKER_00]: But we were so designed that we could turn it out.
[SPEAKER_00]: and we knew how many would go into every compartment.
[SPEAKER_00]: And so we loaded these troops, we would stand at the top and count them down.
[SPEAKER_00]: One poor guy in Long Beach at my abandoned ship station,
[SPEAKER_00]: came there with his helmet liner.
[SPEAKER_00]: He was seasick every time I saw him.
[SPEAKER_00]: He always had his helmet liner.
[SPEAKER_00]: And those of you guys in the Army and the Marine Corps know what a helmet liner is.
[SPEAKER_00]: And it had many uses.
[SPEAKER_00]: One was to catch whatever he had, probably.
[SPEAKER_01]: Exactly.
[SPEAKER_01]: He was throwing up from California to Calcutta, right?
[SPEAKER_00]: That's right.
[SPEAKER_00]: We made one stop in route at Melbourne, Australia.
[SPEAKER_00]: It was 40 days and 40 nights to get from California through Melbourne into Calcutta.
[SPEAKER_01]: I'm gonna talk about that trip a little bit more in a minute,
[SPEAKER_01]: But talk about what your job on the ship was just a little bit of everything.
[SPEAKER_00]: It wasn't one specific job.
[SPEAKER_00]: You had to rotate.
[SPEAKER_00]: A junior officer putting on board a vessel then, a lot of OJT on-the-job training.
[SPEAKER_00]: They take you aboard, and you'll spend three or four weeks with the communication officer, three or four weeks with the first lieutenant who was in charge of all the deck, three or four weeks with the navigation officer, and you made this circular around.
[SPEAKER_00]: I did not get that OJ on-the-job training with the engineering officer.
[SPEAKER_00]: I'll come back to that in just a moment.
[SPEAKER_00]: At the same time, you're being trained as an officer today.
[SPEAKER_00]: You were called a J-O-O-D, junior officer day.
[SPEAKER_00]: And that was three months training period.
[SPEAKER_00]: At the end of that, you were then
[SPEAKER_00]: said to be an officer of the deck.
[SPEAKER_00]: Now what that meant is, remember that ship was 417 feet long, 78 feet on the beam, and about 17,000 tons.
[SPEAKER_00]: And so you had this crew of 400 plus, anywhere from 2,800, 3,000 troops, and you're sailing the ocean blue, and you're responsible during that four hours you have the watch.
[SPEAKER_00]: And if you have any problem, you call the skipper.
[SPEAKER_00]: His cabin was just behind the bridge.
[SPEAKER_00]: Right.
[SPEAKER_01]: So that's what you trained to become officer of the day, and when you were officer of the day, the skipper might begin taking a nap.
[SPEAKER_01]: You were in charge of the officer.
[SPEAKER_00]: Whoever.
[SPEAKER_00]: He was asleep.
[SPEAKER_00]: Whoever had the watch, it was your responsibility.
[SPEAKER_00]: That's already heavy for a 20-year-old boy.
[SPEAKER_01]: I bet it is.
[SPEAKER_01]: I want to talk about that more later.
[SPEAKER_01]: Your first trip from California, you said you stopped in Melbourne to Calcutta.
[SPEAKER_01]: It was a little bit unique in that you had an escort.
[SPEAKER_01]: You said you had a tin can, a destroyer, you had a munition ship, an oiler.
[SPEAKER_01]: But that didn't work out the way you wanted it to.
[SPEAKER_00]: Well, not exactly.
[SPEAKER_00]: We always deemed alone except for this.
[SPEAKER_00]: The only time we were in a small convoy with an escort, we had this Australian destroyer tin can just ahead of us.
[SPEAKER_00]: We were in the center just behind.
[SPEAKER_00]: Port and Starbury was a munition ship and an oiler.
[SPEAKER_00]: So we're steaming along, minding our own business.
[SPEAKER_00]: Next thing was mid-afternoon.
[SPEAKER_00]: We see the destroyer throwing depth charge off the stern.
[SPEAKER_00]: He thought he had a submarine.
[SPEAKER_01]: How far behind are you?
[SPEAKER_00]: Oh, my goodness.
[SPEAKER_00]: Maybe a hundred yards.
[SPEAKER_01]: Okay.
[SPEAKER_00]: I guess.
[SPEAKER_00]: I have to think pretty far about it.
[SPEAKER_00]: About a hundred yards.
[SPEAKER_00]: Yeah.
[SPEAKER_00]: But it's close enough.
[SPEAKER_01]: That's a soft pitching wedge.
[SPEAKER_00]: Yes.
[SPEAKER_00]: And so we had to veer the starboard and avoid the munition ship.
[SPEAKER_00]: Nothing happened, but there was a conversation between the two skippers.
[SPEAKER_00]: They were supposed to tell us before they dropped the depth charges.
[SPEAKER_00]: Now, had it been a Jap submarine, I would have been happy, a Japanese submarine, what I'm supposed to say now.
[SPEAKER_01]: You would have liked to have known, so you wouldn't be on top of it.
[SPEAKER_00]: That's right.
[SPEAKER_01]: So you had to do a little bit of it.
[SPEAKER_00]: If he was down here, it may have scared him off, too.
[SPEAKER_01]: So after that, y'all decided you'd rather be alone.
[SPEAKER_01]: You can handle this by yourself.
[SPEAKER_00]: Well, we're never given the opportunity to sail.
[SPEAKER_00]: So we sailed all over the Atlantic, the Indian, the China Sea.
[SPEAKER_00]: Wherever we went, we were always alone, except for that one time.
[SPEAKER_00]: Exactly.
[SPEAKER_00]: What you do, you zigzag.
[SPEAKER_00]: Right, yeah, sure.
[SPEAKER_00]: You have a path, starboard five degrees, so on, port, whatever it may be.
[SPEAKER_01]: You talked about the passengers on that first trip and you started to talk about that OSS, Office of Strategic Service, which is sort of pre-CIA, right?
[SPEAKER_01]: And mule pack outfit out of Colorado, Red Cross and others.
[SPEAKER_01]: So it was really a potpourri of all kinds of personnel that were fighting the war.
[SPEAKER_00]: We had a few wags.
[SPEAKER_01]: Right.
[SPEAKER_01]: That was okay.
[SPEAKER_00]: That was okay.
[SPEAKER_00]: Yeah.
[SPEAKER_00]: Well, there's a story that I can't tell you.
[SPEAKER_00]: Not with me.
[SPEAKER_01]: Better not.
[SPEAKER_01]: Out of Calcutta, you talked about how you had elements of the 20th Air Force that you were taking to Tinian Island where they were going to stage for the bombing of Japan.
[SPEAKER_01]: So talk a little bit more about that trip.
[SPEAKER_00]: We came into Calcutta up the Hoogie River, which is a tributary of the
[SPEAKER_00]: Ganges, the largest ship they'd ever seen, didn't know how to tie us up.
[SPEAKER_00]: But they finally got us tied up, and we offloaded the people that we had there.
[SPEAKER_00]: And there's still an army lieutenant looking for me, because while there, he bought a suitcase, a cigarette lighter, and something else that I was supposed to send his wife when I got back to the States.
[SPEAKER_00]: I never found the address.
[SPEAKER_00]: So he's probably still fussing at that sailor who took his goods, not deliberately.
[SPEAKER_00]: But when we get into Calcutta, they're about three or four days.
[SPEAKER_00]: And then that's when we load elements of the 20th Air Force.
[SPEAKER_00]: Three days.
[SPEAKER_00]: We started getting messages underway from Tokyo Rose, who was part of their psychological warfare.
[SPEAKER_00]: Said we would be sunk three days out of Calcutta.
[SPEAKER_00]: She knew the name of our skipper, T.R.
[SPEAKER_00]: Cowie.
[SPEAKER_00]: The name of the colonel would come in and it was the 20th, and where we'd been and where we were going.
[SPEAKER_00]: That makes you anxious, to say the least.
[SPEAKER_00]: Exactly.
[SPEAKER_00]: And we were at General Quarters, oh, probably 24 to 36 hours.
[SPEAKER_00]: But nothing happened, but that was part of it.
[SPEAKER_00]: And she got our attention.
[SPEAKER_00]: It made us anxious.
[SPEAKER_00]: Right.
[SPEAKER_01]: The psychological warfare.
[SPEAKER_00]: The psychological warfare.
[SPEAKER_01]: Exactly.
[SPEAKER_01]: So you were expecting any time that...
[SPEAKER_01]: It could happen.
[SPEAKER_01]: Yeah, it was a legitimate threat.
[SPEAKER_00]: That they know who you are and where you've been and where you're going.
[SPEAKER_01]: That's right.
[SPEAKER_01]: So you had to be ready, and general quarters for over a day, almost 48 hours.
[SPEAKER_00]: Over 24 hours, yeah.
[SPEAKER_01]: Right, right.
[SPEAKER_01]: At Tinian, you steamed empty to New Guinea.
[SPEAKER_01]: And talk about that.
[SPEAKER_01]: It was about...
[SPEAKER_01]: When you got to New Guinea, the people that you loaded on at that time.
[SPEAKER_00]: We unloaded.
[SPEAKER_00]: I think there's about 2,700 of these.
[SPEAKER_00]: All these soldiers and nurses had been in New Guinea anywhere from 24 to 28, some 36 months.
[SPEAKER_00]: I can't be exact because I'm going on the stories they told us.
[SPEAKER_00]: Nearly all were yellow from taking Adderburn.
[SPEAKER_00]: Many had jungle rods that you pick up.
[SPEAKER_00]: I was on that three days.
[SPEAKER_00]: I managed to get on my right foot.
[SPEAKER_00]: Took years to ever get rid of it.
[SPEAKER_00]: But we loaded these folks aboard.
[SPEAKER_00]: Many were in pretty bad shape.
[SPEAKER_00]: We had this one soldier.
[SPEAKER_00]: He would sit, put his head back into bulkhead and look at the other one.
[SPEAKER_00]: And we called the bulkhead stair.
[SPEAKER_00]: He just sat there and looked at nothing except another steel bulkhead.
[SPEAKER_00]: We had one army nurse who had apparently having psychological problems.
[SPEAKER_00]: She had jungle rot very badly, could not keep clothes.
[SPEAKER_00]: We had to improvise a padded shell, a place for her.
[SPEAKER_00]: Then we had one soldier to die.
[SPEAKER_00]: None of us had to conduct a barrel at sea, so we broke out the manual.
[SPEAKER_00]: The carpenter made the wooden rack.
[SPEAKER_00]: We sewed him in canvas, put shells and other weights in there.
[SPEAKER_00]: The chaplain said the appropriate words.
[SPEAKER_00]: And we, as you've seen the movies, we dumped him into the sea.
[SPEAKER_00]: We didn't want to do that very often.
[SPEAKER_00]: That was the only time that that happened.
[SPEAKER_00]: We did not have the facilities to keep the body.
[SPEAKER_00]: Exactly.
[SPEAKER_01]: You talked about, this was in New Guinea, where they had been actually in New Guinea about 27, 28 months.
[SPEAKER_01]: Something like that.
[SPEAKER_01]: You talked about the burial at sea.
[SPEAKER_01]: Talk a little bit more about the boat itself.
[SPEAKER_01]: You said that it was a crowded situation.
[SPEAKER_01]: Was it one of the boats where you always had to duck around and
[SPEAKER_01]: And you bump your head a lot of places.
[SPEAKER_00]: Well, you're always bumping your head.
[SPEAKER_00]: And I had hair.
[SPEAKER_00]: The ship, excuse me, please.
[SPEAKER_00]: I'm sorry.
[SPEAKER_00]: I'm correct him on that.
[SPEAKER_00]: I had hair at the end.
[SPEAKER_00]: It didn't bother me twice to hit my head.
[SPEAKER_00]: But no, for the troops, it's especially crowded.
[SPEAKER_00]: And we gave them.
[SPEAKER_00]: freedom be on topside any time they want it to.
[SPEAKER_00]: Of course, we always had to alert them, when you're topside at dark, do not strike a match to light your cigarette.
[SPEAKER_00]: You can see a struck match in the butt of that cigarette about 14 to 16 miles.
[SPEAKER_00]: It's where the Earth's curvature is such that it's no longer visible.
[SPEAKER_00]: But that's an open signal for anybody who may be out there who might want to take a shot at you.
[SPEAKER_00]: Now, our guys learned pretty quickly.
[SPEAKER_00]: Later, I mentioned the Australian troops.
[SPEAKER_00]: Right, right.
[SPEAKER_01]: No, go ahead and do that now.
[SPEAKER_01]: You like the Australians.
[SPEAKER_00]: You gained a lot of respect for them and their country and all of that, but sometimes you had to... Well, we went into towns in Australia,
[SPEAKER_00]: This is our second visit to Australia.
[SPEAKER_00]: We loaded, again, about 2,800, 2,150 Australian troops.
[SPEAKER_00]: And as they came aboard, I was standing at the head of the gangway leading down to a compartment that held 120 soldiers.
[SPEAKER_00]: Soon the word came up, sir, there are no more bunks.
[SPEAKER_00]: I said, I know there are bunks.
[SPEAKER_00]: So I went down.
[SPEAKER_00]: They were throwing the gear on one bunk, got themselves on the other, said, I'm sorry, guys, you only get one bunk.
[SPEAKER_00]: So we worked that out.
[SPEAKER_00]: But they were very pleasant people.
[SPEAKER_00]: I liked both Melbourne a great deal and Townsville a great deal and the people we met interacted with.
[SPEAKER_00]: Now, just before we got into Townsville, we had pushed our crew to chip and paint the deck.
[SPEAKER_00]: Any sailor knows what that means.
[SPEAKER_00]: You get on your deck, you chip all the loose paint and you repaint it.
[SPEAKER_00]: We want this ship to look good for our Australian friends.
[SPEAKER_00]: So they come aboard with their hobnail boots.
[SPEAKER_00]: As I understand it,
[SPEAKER_00]: soldiers in the British Empire wore hobnails.
[SPEAKER_00]: And literally, if you look upside down, the whole bottom had its little nail head.
[SPEAKER_00]: And it was for traction.
[SPEAKER_00]: Great if you need it.
[SPEAKER_00]: But in a couple of days, you could not find any paint on our deck.
[SPEAKER_00]: And our sailors not very, very happy.
[SPEAKER_00]: All their work had gone to naught.
[SPEAKER_01]: They'd worked hard on that deck.
[SPEAKER_00]: You said that you were- We took those to Timor, T-I-M-O-R, for the Dutch East Indies.
[SPEAKER_00]: I see.
[SPEAKER_01]: You said that you never came under attack in those two years.
[SPEAKER_01]: Looking back, is that somewhat surprising considering that you were a troop transport and you would think from the enemy standpoint that that would be a prime target?
[SPEAKER_00]: You would think so.
[SPEAKER_00]: Especially Tokyo Rose knew who we were and what we were doing.
[SPEAKER_00]: But occasionally we would have sightings
[SPEAKER_00]: of what appeared to be periscopes, but no one ever bothers.
[SPEAKER_00]: We never shot in anger at anybody, and we're always thankful.
[SPEAKER_00]: Honestly, when you're steaming in any of your waters, whether it's Japanese or German, it worries you.
[SPEAKER_00]: Those can always happen.
[SPEAKER_00]: And on our board, we had two 5-inch 38s, which are our main armament.
[SPEAKER_00]: We had 20 millimeters and 40 millimeters anti-aircraft.
[SPEAKER_00]: We practiced a lot, but we never shot at anger.
[SPEAKER_01]: You eventually went to the Philippines to take troops back to the States before going to Europe via the Panama Canal.
[SPEAKER_01]: Let's get you over to the Atlantic after we look at some photographs.
[SPEAKER_01]: We've got some pictures that you have supplied us.
[SPEAKER_01]: And there is a young Ensign Garland Bayless, I guess.
[SPEAKER_01]: About how old were you thinking?
[SPEAKER_00]: 20.
[SPEAKER_00]: 20?
[SPEAKER_01]: Great hair.
[SPEAKER_00]: Great hair, thank you.
[SPEAKER_00]: Yeah, you bet.
[SPEAKER_01]: You bet.
[SPEAKER_01]: There's your ship.
[SPEAKER_00]: That's the Mighty Mac, the Terror of the Pacific.
[SPEAKER_01]: There it is, the General J.H.
[SPEAKER_01]: McCray.
[SPEAKER_01]: You're one of the people in that picture.
[SPEAKER_00]: I'm one facing you.
[SPEAKER_00]: With my hands on my hips, I'm not sure why.
[SPEAKER_00]: I think we're tied up there in Manus Island in the U.S.
[SPEAKER_00]: That is somewhere in the Atlantic.
[SPEAKER_01]: Now, was that a pose picture?
[SPEAKER_00]: Sir, he was posed.
[SPEAKER_01]: That's what I was thinking.
[SPEAKER_01]: You were just sitting there just looking out over the water.
[SPEAKER_01]: No, I just wanted to see her looking over the water.
[SPEAKER_01]: They said, yeah, it looks like it could be used for a recruiting poster.
[SPEAKER_01]: Yes.
[SPEAKER_01]: I found this.
[SPEAKER_00]: I'm glad you did.
[SPEAKER_01]: And that's a sort of a sketch of the same.
[SPEAKER_00]: See, if you look at it, the anchor's not there yet.
[SPEAKER_01]: Right.
[SPEAKER_01]: The U.S.
[SPEAKER_01]: General J.H.
[SPEAKER_01]: McRae.
[SPEAKER_01]: And now this is at Columbia, right?
[SPEAKER_00]: Columbia University Midshipment School.
[SPEAKER_00]: And there's the Corps of Midshipmen in Parade right there.
[SPEAKER_00]: I want you to see every man there had a hat on.
[SPEAKER_00]: That was 1944.
[SPEAKER_01]: It was all military.
[SPEAKER_01]: Here's our last picture.
[SPEAKER_01]: And like I say, that looks like a picture that could be on a Navy recruiting poster right there.
[SPEAKER_01]: That's a good-looking sailor.
[SPEAKER_00]: Well, thank you.
[SPEAKER_01]: Boy, the white teeth and everything.
[SPEAKER_00]: And hair.
[SPEAKER_01]: And hair.
[SPEAKER_01]: I bet you got some dates from that picture.
[SPEAKER_01]: You hadn't met Mary yet.
[SPEAKER_00]: Oh, no, no, no, no, no.
[SPEAKER_01]: It never hurt.
[SPEAKER_01]: Well, you were talking about at...
[SPEAKER_01]: Now, I'm sorry, that picture we saw before, was that at Columbia or the Citadel?
[SPEAKER_01]: That was at Columbia?
[SPEAKER_00]: No.
[SPEAKER_00]: The other one was after I left Columbia because I'd already been to the Pacific and I was back home on leave.
[SPEAKER_00]: Okay.
[SPEAKER_00]: The one in the sailor outfit was just before I started midshipmen school.
[SPEAKER_01]: The picture of the review that we just looked at.
[SPEAKER_00]: That was in September 1944 at Columbia University.
[SPEAKER_01]: At Columbia University.
[SPEAKER_01]: Okay.
[SPEAKER_01]: Because we're going to get on later talking about the Citadel later on.
[SPEAKER_01]: From the Pacific to the Atlantic, through the Panama Canal, and you went to, you landed at Lahore, France, where, again, the same job.
[SPEAKER_01]: You picked up troops, took them back to the States and wherever they needed to go.
[SPEAKER_00]: We took them back this time to Norfolk.
[SPEAKER_01]: The Atlantic Ocean was a little bit more of a challenge than the Pacific.
[SPEAKER_01]: You had some, obviously, some challenges in the Pacific as far as the weather and the currents and the waves and the storms and all that, but the Atlantic was particularly mean, right?
[SPEAKER_00]: Well, one thing, it's a smaller body of water.
[SPEAKER_00]: The storms can be bad in either.
[SPEAKER_00]: Right.
[SPEAKER_00]: But I think it was on that trip, from going to New York, I guess you're asking about that heavy storm.
[SPEAKER_01]: Right, yes, sir.
[SPEAKER_00]: In a normal steaming,
[SPEAKER_00]: We would do about 420, 424 nautical miles in 24 hours.
[SPEAKER_00]: About 10 to 12 knots.
[SPEAKER_00]: Yeah.
[SPEAKER_00]: Right.
[SPEAKER_00]: Then there's one particular storm in the North Atlantic.
[SPEAKER_00]: As best we could figure, we may have made 11 nautical miles forward.
[SPEAKER_00]: In those seas, all you can do is keep your bow into the sea.
[SPEAKER_00]: That is where the waves are coming to you.
[SPEAKER_00]: If you ever fall off, then that wave hits you broadside and you have to go over.
[SPEAKER_00]: Right.
[SPEAKER_01]: Almost like road waves type of thing.
[SPEAKER_00]: Yeah.
[SPEAKER_00]: I think it was in that one, or the one in the Pacific.
[SPEAKER_00]: We had a sailor standing there to watch our, not a Ticometer.
[SPEAKER_00]: It's a device.
[SPEAKER_00]: It's a big thing with an arrow.
[SPEAKER_00]: As it goes to your right of the starboard, it would get down there.
[SPEAKER_00]: It would shudder and shudder and shudder.
[SPEAKER_00]: Then it'd come back and shudder.
[SPEAKER_00]: If you went beyond a certain point, you kept going.
[SPEAKER_00]: One of the things we could have done about it, if it happened,
[SPEAKER_00]: But you're sitting here watching it, and especially if you're the OD, the officer of the deck, and if that thing turned on your watch, it's a bad scene.
[SPEAKER_00]: Exactly.
[SPEAKER_01]: You talked about some of the waves were hitting at 140 feet because they were coming over the side.
[SPEAKER_00]: From the bow, the form was 144 feet tall.
[SPEAKER_00]: As we're hitting the sea, the waves broke all the way over.
[SPEAKER_00]: I better keep my hands down.
[SPEAKER_00]: My wife will get me.
[SPEAKER_01]: You had an assignment to take some elements of the 9th from Europe back to the Pacific for the staging of the ground war.
[SPEAKER_00]: That was from Marseille.
[SPEAKER_01]: Right.
[SPEAKER_01]: But while you were in the Atlantic, you got word that the bomb had been dropped in Japan and that the war was over in Japan.
[SPEAKER_01]: And you were in the right place for that.
[SPEAKER_00]: Talk about that.
[SPEAKER_00]: Well, we unloaded these troops to take them back through the Panama to
[SPEAKER_00]: probably the Philippines, we were unclear on that, for staging to invade Japan.
[SPEAKER_00]: The war was over in Japan, and someone in the Pentagon made the decision that all those ships transporting troops that had already transited, passed through the Panama, would continue to their destination.
[SPEAKER_00]: Those who had not, us, we were diverted to New York City.
[SPEAKER_00]: And talk about happy people.
[SPEAKER_00]: When we passed the word, that ship rocked not from seas,
[SPEAKER_00]: But from happy soldiers.
[SPEAKER_00]: That's right.
[SPEAKER_00]: And I don't blame them.
[SPEAKER_00]: No.
[SPEAKER_00]: And they broke out all sorts of stuff you drink.
[SPEAKER_00]: I don't know what it was or where they had it.
[SPEAKER_01]: Because they all of a sudden their course just changed to New York City instead of going to get ready.
[SPEAKER_00]: To invade Japan.
[SPEAKER_01]: For a ground war.
[SPEAKER_01]: That's right.
[SPEAKER_01]: Yeah.
[SPEAKER_01]: No wonder that they were happy.
[SPEAKER_01]: You were actually on the ship until 1946, really long after the war because there was a lot more transporting to be done.
[SPEAKER_01]: To bring people back.
[SPEAKER_01]: Correct.
[SPEAKER_00]: On one of the trips through the Suez, we went both to what is now Pakistan and what is Basra, which you read about a lot in our war in Iraq, up to Persian Gulf to pick up troops.
[SPEAKER_00]: I started talking to guys.
[SPEAKER_00]: You know Jim Bayless?
[SPEAKER_00]: Yes.
[SPEAKER_00]: That was my brother who I had not seen for over three years, and he had left Basra three weeks before I got there.
[SPEAKER_00]: Otherwise, I would have had the chance to bring him home, but I did not.
[SPEAKER_01]: We're running short on time.
[SPEAKER_01]: So you finished in 46, like I say, in the summer of 1946 is when you got off the ship and you enrolled, came back, you enrolled in Arkansas at Fayetteville in the fall of 46, started business administration.
[SPEAKER_01]: You, like me,
[SPEAKER_01]: didn't think very too much of accounting and taking stat.
[SPEAKER_00]: Well, they didn't think much of me.
[SPEAKER_00]: We used to call it then, run and play with BBA.
[SPEAKER_00]: And both drove me crazy.
[SPEAKER_00]: So I went back to the sciences.
[SPEAKER_00]: I started as a pre-med.
[SPEAKER_00]: Right.
[SPEAKER_00]: And got my bachelor's in zoology and chemistry.
[SPEAKER_00]: Taught a year in Dermott, Arkansas.
[SPEAKER_00]: Taught public school in Dermott, Arkansas.
[SPEAKER_00]: Then went to Orange, Texas.
[SPEAKER_01]: Seventh grade.
[SPEAKER_00]: Yeah.
[SPEAKER_00]: Seven through 12.
[SPEAKER_00]: You said that's when you lost your hair.
[SPEAKER_00]: I had seven different preparations every day.
[SPEAKER_00]: Right.
[SPEAKER_00]: And then to Orange work for DuPont.
[SPEAKER_00]: That's where Mary and I met.
[SPEAKER_00]: I decided to go to graduate school at the University of Texas in history.
[SPEAKER_00]: Big switch.
[SPEAKER_01]: You and Mary were married in 1950.
[SPEAKER_01]: You bet.
[SPEAKER_01]: You switched from the sciences, from business administration to the sciences to history.
[SPEAKER_01]: And that took you to the Citadel for one year.
[SPEAKER_01]: That was a great experience.
[SPEAKER_01]: Great experience.
[SPEAKER_01]: Your first son, David, was born there at the Citadel.
[SPEAKER_01]: But you were there for only one year, and you had heard about Texas A&M from a professor that you had worked with at the University of Texas, right?
[SPEAKER_00]: Ralph Steen, who's head of the department at A&M, was a visiting prof at UT.
[SPEAKER_00]: Not having him in class, got to know him.
[SPEAKER_00]: He called me once I got to the Citadel and in 55 the legislature passed a law requiring all graduates of Public University have six hours of American history six hours of poli-sci or government What do you want to call it?
[SPEAKER_00]: He called me said they give me special money to hire five people if you ever think you're coming it's now So I did I regretted leaving after only one year at the Citadel, right?
[SPEAKER_00]: But I did not think I could pass up the opportunity
[SPEAKER_01]: You talked about how at the Citadel it was all military.
[SPEAKER_01]: You yourself were in uniform as you taught classes there.
[SPEAKER_01]: But then you came to A&M in 1956 and spent 34 years in the history department.
[SPEAKER_01]: We could do a whole other show just on your time at Texas A&M.
[SPEAKER_01]: But that was during a time I know you knew General Rutter quite well as fellow military men.
[SPEAKER_00]: I had his order in class.
[SPEAKER_01]: Right.
[SPEAKER_01]: When you came, Bear Bryant was the head football coach.
[SPEAKER_01]: And so 34 years at Texas A&M and retired in 19...
[SPEAKER_00]: First time in 86 from full time, 1990.
[SPEAKER_00]: For real.
[SPEAKER_00]: Right, right.
[SPEAKER_00]: That four years, I taught each fall semester during the football season.
[SPEAKER_00]: It's part-time.
[SPEAKER_01]: We're out of time.
[SPEAKER_01]: Thank you.
[SPEAKER_01]: Well, thank you.
[SPEAKER_00]: Appreciate it.
[SPEAKER_01]: Thank you very much.
[SPEAKER_01]: Enjoy doing it.
[SPEAKER_01]: It is.
[SPEAKER_01]: It was fun.
[SPEAKER_01]: Enjoyed it.
[SPEAKER_01]: Garland Bayless and his wife, Mary, were married in 1950, and they have three sons, David, Fred, and Mark, and eight grandchildren.
[SPEAKER_01]: He speaks proudly of his opportunity to serve 30 years as a sailor, and we honor him and salute him for that service.
[SPEAKER_01]: I'm Tom Turbyville.
[SPEAKER_01]: Join us next time on Veterans of the Valley.